Okay.
NOTE CONF
That was, uh, foggy mountain breakdown on the five string
banjo.
NOTE CONF
Uh, so.
And now for lambda expressions.
NOTE CONF
Okay, this is carrying on.
Just carrying on from my lecture on Friday.
NOTE CONF
Yesterday.
Um, on, um, higher order functions where I showed you
NOTE CONF
map, filter and fold.
So here's some more stuff about, um, about functions in
NOTE CONF
higher order functions relating to that stuff.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So, uh, lambda expressions.
Um.
NOTE CONF
So the first thing I want to do is, um,
to explain.
NOTE CONF
Well, it's called currying.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Uh, what is that?
Uh, what I want to explain now is, um, I
NOTE CONF
told you a long time ago now seems like a
long time ago.
NOTE CONF
It's only a few weeks.
I told you, when you have a function that has
NOTE CONF
more than one argument, you write it.
You write the type.
NOTE CONF
Like this.
Okay, first argument arrow, second argument arrow result.
NOTE CONF
Or if there's more than two, then you know more
arrows.
NOTE CONF
Okay, I said, I said at the time, this is,
uh, what you do in Haskell.
NOTE CONF
Um, I said I would explain it later.
Um, so later has now arrived.
NOTE CONF
Uh, so it's now time for me to explain this.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
This is something that's a little strange at first, but,
um, it's cool once you get used to it.
NOTE CONF
So.
Uh, so here's an example.
NOTE CONF
Oops.
Here's the example adding, you know, it's very simple about
NOTE CONF
adding two numbers.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So if I would write that as a function add
uh with the definition like this okay.
NOTE CONF
It's just it's just calling the plus function.
I just wanted to give it a name so I
NOTE CONF
could so I could kind of talk about its type
and so forth.
NOTE CONF
So, um, okay, if I apply that to three and
four, uh, it takes three plus four and I get
NOTE CONF
seven.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
There's another way of thinking about this.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So I give it two arguments.
It gives me the answer.
NOTE CONF
Simple, right.
Another way of thinking about this is to think about
NOTE CONF
where are.
Where are the implicit parentheses and these in this definition
NOTE CONF
okay.
Um implicit parentheses.
NOTE CONF
So when you, when you have an expression uh, computer
looks at it and figures out, uh, the structure of
NOTE CONF
the expression.
And there's things like grouping, you know, so multiplication before
NOTE CONF
addition and so forth.
So if you would want to put in all of
NOTE CONF
the, um, the structure, you, you, you parentheses it, put
in all the parentheses.
NOTE CONF
So um, and so here's, here's how this would work
for this, for this definition.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
The same definition is before.
NOTE CONF
And I've just put in these parentheses which are which
are the way that Haskell views, views this uh this
NOTE CONF
stuff okay.
So first of all, uh, it parentheses rises to the
NOTE CONF
right.
Um, when you have arrows like this okay.
NOTE CONF
This is called right associative.
And when you have, a function with applied to multiple
NOTE CONF
parameters, it parentheses to the left left associative.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So what this means is that um add of x.
So this is a this is like a thing.
NOTE CONF
It's not just ad x y it's out of x
is a thing.
NOTE CONF
It's a function and you apply it to y.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So AD has this type which means if you apply
it to an int x you get a function of
NOTE CONF
this type.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
You apply it to an integer x and you get
a function of type into arrow int like I've done
NOTE CONF
here okay.
Add ad apply to three.
NOTE CONF
I get a function from end to end and then
I can apply that to four.
NOTE CONF
The result is the same as before three plus four,
namely seven.
NOTE CONF
Okay, but what I've done here is I'm breaking down
this process of applying a function to two arguments to
NOTE CONF
two steps of applying the function to one argument.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Because.
You know why?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Because something like add three a function add three.
NOTE CONF
This makes sense on its own okay.
It doesn't it doesn't only make sense when I when
NOTE CONF
I add 3 to 4 it makes sense just adding
three.
NOTE CONF
It's the function that adds three to things.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
You could you could you know, if that's a function
that you that you're, that you would like to define,
NOTE CONF
then you can define a function, add three to things.
You can apply it to various numbers.
NOTE CONF
It will add three to whatever those numbers are.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Or the function that adds one to things.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So that's a perfectly good function on its own.
And it's produced by applying this function.
NOTE CONF
Add here to just one of its two arguments in
order to get a function that, uh, you know, that
NOTE CONF
that takes integers to integers, adding three to them.
All right.
NOTE CONF
So, um, this is kind of summarised by this slogan.
A function of two numbers is the same as a
NOTE CONF
function of the first number that returns a function of
the second number.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And I said this is the way that Haskell, um,
NOTE CONF
puts in the parentheses.
If you, if you wanted to, to sort of view
NOTE CONF
the way that it's that it's understanding these things and
um, interestingly, parentheses rising to the right in the type
NOTE CONF
and parenthesis to the left in the, in the expression,
these actually match.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
As you can see if x has type int, then
NOTE CONF
this thing in parentheses here is a function from end
to int.
NOTE CONF
And that's what the type says.
You apply.
NOTE CONF
You apply to something of type int and it gives
you a function from end to end.
NOTE CONF
All right.
This is uh I'll come to um partial application which
NOTE CONF
is what's happening here.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, function can be partially applied to, you know, if
it has multiple multiple arguments can be partially applied to
NOTE CONF
one argument or to, uh, you know, fewer arguments than
all the ones that it has.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
I can write this in a different way.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
I can give a name to the function, uh, that
NOTE CONF
I produce when I apply ad to a single, um,
parameter argument.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So out of x is the function g where g
NOTE CONF
is defined here as a helper function.
I don't know if this makes it any clearer, but
NOTE CONF
it gives the same result, and it just gives a
name to the function that I that I get when
NOTE CONF
I apply ad to x.
Okay, so out of x is a function g which
NOTE CONF
when applied to y gives you x plus y okay
x.
NOTE CONF
X is there and it appears in the helper function.
And y is uh.
NOTE CONF
It's part of the definition of the helper function okay.
So and so if we would add uh, if we
NOTE CONF
would apply uh do this application add three.
Uh applied to four.
NOTE CONF
This would give us the function g applied to four
where where g is defined like this.
NOTE CONF
Now we've got x instantiated to to three which again
gives us 3 to 3 plus four, which is equal
NOTE CONF
to seven.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, this is just all kind of explaining how you
can define functions of multiple arguments in terms of functions
NOTE CONF
of one argument, where you kind of partially apply the
function of multiple arguments to first its first argument and
NOTE CONF
then second argument, so forth.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And um, this is again higher order functions.
This is not, um, functions as arguments of other functions,
NOTE CONF
but functions as results of functions.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So this function ad it takes an int and it
gives a function as its result.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
You saw with map, filter and fold functions that take
NOTE CONF
functions.
The result here is functions taking giving functions as a
NOTE CONF
as results.
Sorry I said I said map, filter and fold.
NOTE CONF
They're functions that take functions as inputs or as arguments.
Here's functions producing functions as results or outputs.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so this idea happens to be named after Haskell
Curry.
NOTE CONF
Have you heard of something else that's named after Haskell
Curry yes.
NOTE CONF
Programming language you're learning.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, so, um, currying, it's not Indian food.
It's, um, it's it's named after him.
NOTE CONF
Um, and the joke in functional programming is you could
have called it.
NOTE CONF
Sure.
And fingerling, but that's harder to pronounce.
NOTE CONF
Um, or fragging.
So these are some other people.
NOTE CONF
Um, so these are, these are people who did work
in about the 1930s on, um, theory of functions, sort
NOTE CONF
of a pure theory of functions in mathematics and logic
before computers were invented.
NOTE CONF
Um, so the idea of, of what functions are and,
um, you know, the meaning of, uh, function, application and
NOTE CONF
so forth.
And currying is about transforming a two argument function into
NOTE CONF
a one argument function, producing a one argument function.
Let me, uh, explain a little bit.
NOTE CONF
So we've got here a function, uh, type that has
this shape.
NOTE CONF
Um, is that in focus?
Wait a second.
NOTE CONF
There's various buttons that I'm trying to.
It's not working.
NOTE CONF
I guess it's in focus.
Okay, so the function, the type that I've got has
NOTE CONF
this shape A, B and C or all int in
this case.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Now, um, it's possible to define a function which takes
NOTE CONF
a pair.
Of values as a as argument.
NOTE CONF
I mean, I could have, I could have, uh, defined
um ad I'll call it ad prime.
NOTE CONF
I could have defined add prime.
This is kind of more what you might be used
NOTE CONF
to in programming.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
It's actually possible to do that.
I said in Haskell you usually don't do that.
NOTE CONF
But it's it's it's a permissible definition.
We don't do it usually because this there's some, this,
NOTE CONF
um, idea of partial applications is handy.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So um, there's, there's add define in that with that
style of uh with that style of type and here's
NOTE CONF
add prime define with this style of type.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, so currying is the is the uh, taking a
function of this type and turning it into a function
NOTE CONF
of this type.
And it's actually a function in Haskell built in function
NOTE CONF
in Haskell.
And the other direction is called an currying.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So it's a function also a function Haskell.
NOTE CONF
So curry curry is actually a function which takes.
Something of that type and turns it into something of
NOTE CONF
that type.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And now we are really talking about higher order functions
here.
NOTE CONF
This is this is a function which takes a function
as argument produces a function as its result.
NOTE CONF
And the function that it produces a result is a
function which takes a value and produces a function.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So it's it's nested, uh, several levels deep.
NOTE CONF
The arrows, the arrows are nested several levels deep.
And, um, curry.
NOTE CONF
Uh, has the, uh, the result has the, the type
where the arrow.
NOTE CONF
I mean, it's it's this arrow that.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And if you would apply this so curry apply to
add prime gives you add okay.
NOTE CONF
Now this is at the moment just to kind of
playing with simple sort of thing to get you a
NOTE CONF
little bit used to the idea of um of types
that have lots of arrows in them and the way
NOTE CONF
that you can kind of move between different, different kinds
of functions, types.
NOTE CONF
Um, these, these functions are sometimes useful.
Um, not all that often, but sometimes.
NOTE CONF
Um, anyway, I just explained that to, to talk about
this terminology that you don't have to really know about,
NOTE CONF
but it's, um, it's something you might come across.
I will just briefly mention that functions.
NOTE CONF
When we talk about functions that have these kind of
higher order types like this.
NOTE CONF
Um, the type system in Haskell is um, uh, is
sometimes, uh, well, I'll say that, that if you try
NOTE CONF
to write a definition of a function like that.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Suppose I want to write a definition of this function.
Curry.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
If I want to write a definition of curry, it's
NOTE CONF
almost impossible to, uh, to make a mistake because, uh,
the, the function almost writes itself.
NOTE CONF
So let's try to do this, okay.
Curry.
NOTE CONF
It takes a function as its argument.
So let's call that f.
NOTE CONF
So f has that type.
And the result should be a function of this type
NOTE CONF
okay.
So it's a function that takes something of type A
NOTE CONF
and something of type B and gives you something of
type C.
NOTE CONF
So here's the something of type A, let's call it
x.
NOTE CONF
Here's the something of type B, let's call it y.
And now I want something of type C.
NOTE CONF
So how do I get something of type C.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
The only way that I can do that is using
F, because it's the only thing that delivers me a
NOTE CONF
result of type C.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So I have to apply F to something.
And what do I apply f two.
NOTE CONF
Well I have to apply to pair to a pair
which has an A and B.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
The only things I have that have types A and
NOTE CONF
B are x and y.
So that's the definition.
NOTE CONF
And there's nothing else I can write that has it
that has the correct type.
NOTE CONF
That's what I meant by the definition kind of writes
itself.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, no need for, you know, if then else case
NOTE CONF
analysis.
Uh uh, list, uh, you know, list comprehension or anything.
NOTE CONF
It's the only thing I can write that has that
type.
NOTE CONF
And, uh, you can, as an exercise, try to define
on curry if you want.
NOTE CONF
It's not very much.
It's not very different.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
I hope that's, uh.
NOTE CONF
Understandable.
Anyway, uh, even if it's not helpful, go back to
NOTE CONF
my slides.
Um.
NOTE CONF
So partial evaluation.
As I said, you can, um, if you have a
NOTE CONF
function of multiple arguments, you can, uh, if you wish,
apply it to, uh, not all of its arguments.
NOTE CONF
You could apply just one of its arguments or two
or in this, you know, this one has this this
NOTE CONF
function folder has, um, has three arguments function, value and
list.
NOTE CONF
Okay, before you get a result and defining some, I
define some by defining fold by applying fold to three
NOTE CONF
arguments okay.
Which gives me a result.
NOTE CONF
Okay I can instead define some okay.
This is sum of x is I define sum of
NOTE CONF
x is by saying it's the same as fold applied
to these three arguments.
NOTE CONF
I could instead equivalently say well fold uh is a
is a function which takes two arguments and produces a
NOTE CONF
function as a result.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Here's, you know, argument one, argument two producing a function
as a result.
NOTE CONF
What function is that?
It's the function which takes the empty list to to.
NOTE CONF
Um, for some reason I've called this u rather than
v, um, and a list that's non-empty to to this
NOTE CONF
to this result here.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And then I can define some, um, as you know,
the application of fold to the two arguments plus and
NOTE CONF
zero.
This is, this is very similar to what I wrote
NOTE CONF
up here.
The only difference is this is sum of x is
NOTE CONF
is equal to fold applied to three arguments.
And this is some which is fold applied to two
NOTE CONF
arguments.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So we're um, we're leaving the part about the fact
that it takes I mean here we've got X is
NOTE CONF
here and we've got X is here.
I'm not explaining this as well as I as I
NOTE CONF
perhaps should, but basically if you define f of x
equals something of x, it's equivalent to saying f equals
NOTE CONF
the something you can kind of the x's cancel.
Does that make sense.
NOTE CONF
Any questions.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
The point here is that we can partially apply functions
okay.
NOTE CONF
We can apply fold to not all of its arguments.
First one second one.
NOTE CONF
And we choose not to apply it to the third
one in this definition here.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, you'll find this is sometimes useful.
NOTE CONF
And I'll show you some things coming up where it,
uh, where it's kind of useful, this kind of thing.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So, um, so all of these definitions that I had
NOTE CONF
before in the last lecture, some product concat and an
or defined in terms of fold.
NOTE CONF
So sum of x is equals.
This thing with x is at the end.
NOTE CONF
And similarly product concat and an or um.
Exactly the same definition could be given by um, leaving
NOTE CONF
off the um, you know, the list argument.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Because saying that, saying that some apply to a list
is equal to fold applied to these two arguments.
NOTE CONF
And that list is the same as saying that some
hoops sum is equal to fold.
NOTE CONF
Apply to these first two arguments okay.
The list.
NOTE CONF
The list is the thing that is the argument of
the resulting or the resulting um, function.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so looking at these two it says simplified.
You may or may not find this to be simpler.
NOTE CONF
It's it's, um, four characters fewer.
Okay, so in that sense, it's simpler.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
We've dropped we dropped the, uh, the X's on both
NOTE CONF
sides.
So in that sense, it's simpler.
NOTE CONF
You might find it a little bit harder to read,
but, um, anyway, um, this is a style of, um,
NOTE CONF
so this, this idea of kind of dropping parameters wherever
possible.
NOTE CONF
Um, this is this is a style of functional programming,
and it's sometimes called, um, point free style, um, or
NOTE CONF
by people who don't like it.
It's called pointless style.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Point here is in the, in the mathematical sense, where
NOTE CONF
you've got a space of, of values and you're, you're
talking about points in the space.
NOTE CONF
So these are the arguments of the function.
So point free or pointless means you're not talking about
NOTE CONF
like the the, the, the points and the space of
arguments.
NOTE CONF
You're, you're you're abstracting away from that.
Okay, so point free style versus pointed style.
NOTE CONF
Um, it's not about there being no point.
It's about the points in the space of arguments.
NOTE CONF
Anyway, um, that's a bit of jargon that you don't
have to remember.
NOTE CONF
Um, it's just something that functional programmers, um, like to
kid each other with in their spare time.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Is that all halfway clear?
NOTE CONF
Uh, yeah, I see a thumbs up for, uh, not
everybody.
NOTE CONF
Anyway, you can ask questions if you want.
I want to get on to Lambda Expressions now.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Lambda expressions.
You might have heard of lambda expressions before.
NOTE CONF
Um, uh, they have been making their way into programming
languages.
NOTE CONF
Um, other than Haskell.
Um, let me explain what's going.
NOTE CONF
Let me explain lambda expressions in Haskell.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So so um, this is an example.
This is like an example that I showed you already.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
This is this is the sum of the squares of
NOTE CONF
the positive numbers in a list.
My previous example was the sum of the squares of
NOTE CONF
the odd numbers in the list.
And the only reason why I've changed that is so
NOTE CONF
that I can have two helper functions rather than one
here.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so so when I write this thing okay, I
can write this down.
NOTE CONF
And I might think, well, this is kind of a
pain.
NOTE CONF
I have to define these, uh, these helper functions here.
And I'm only using them once.
NOTE CONF
I'm using square here and I'm using pause here.
And, um, there should be some better way of doing
NOTE CONF
this where I can, um, you know, replace square by
its definition and replace pause by its definition.
NOTE CONF
So I might think, well, let me just sort of
bung the, uh, the body of the function definition in
NOTE CONF
place of the function name.
Okay, so I'm replacing square here by um by x
NOTE CONF
times x okay.
Because whoops because square is equal to x times x
NOTE CONF
okay I might do that.
I might try to do that.
NOTE CONF
And I might try to replace pause by its body
okay.
NOTE CONF
And this will not work unfortunately.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um it will not work.
The computer will say um, I don't understand.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
It will say, actually, it'll complain three times, it'll complain
NOTE CONF
about it'll complain about this X, it will complain about
this X and it'll complain about this x.
NOTE CONF
And it will say each time I don't know what
x is.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
It will say not in scope.
NOTE CONF
It means I don't know what X is.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
The problem is, what we want here is a function
which takes a value x.
NOTE CONF
You know here we have it.
It takes a value x and it produces x times
NOTE CONF
x.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So we've got x times x here.
But we don't have the parts saying I want a
NOTE CONF
function that takes x and produces that result.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So I need a way to say a function taking
a value and producing this result in this case okay.
NOTE CONF
Assuming that x is the argument return x times x.
So how do we do this okay so um lambda
NOTE CONF
expressions.
So here is a lambda expression okay.
NOTE CONF
It's it's Haskell's way of saying the function which given
x produces the result x times x.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so what was missing before is the bit at
the beginning that says you know the function which given
NOTE CONF
x produces.
X times x.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And and the the this pause thing.
NOTE CONF
Similarly the function which given x uh checks to see
whether or not x is greater than zero okay.
NOTE CONF
So these are called lambda expressions.
I'll explain in a minute why they're called lambda expressions.
NOTE CONF
They are functions.
They're functions nameless functions.
NOTE CONF
They don't you don't have to give them a name.
You don't have to call this square or pause.
NOTE CONF
You can just write the function without giving it a
name.
NOTE CONF
And you use a variable here.
And it can be any variable.
NOTE CONF
Obviously it could X is arbitrary.
You could use any variable as long as it's the
NOTE CONF
same in um, you know, as long as you use
the same x here and here.
NOTE CONF
And this one of course could be y.
All right.
NOTE CONF
These, these I happen to have used x twice here.
It doesn't have to be.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Is that clear so far I hope.
NOTE CONF
And why is this called lambda calculus?
Um, because logicians in the 1930s invented the lambda calculus.
NOTE CONF
And mathematicians like to use, um, Greek, Greek letters.
And so they used lambda.
NOTE CONF
Um, they, they wrote what we're writing as, as as
this.
NOTE CONF
They wrote like that.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So, um, lambda x dot x greater than x.
We're writing backslash x.
NOTE CONF
Uh right.
Pointing arrow x greater than x.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
We write this because um, this this backslash is the
NOTE CONF
closest thing on the keyboard to the Greek letter lambda?
That's the only reason.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And instead of dot, uh, because dots used for other
NOTE CONF
things in Haskell, we use this sort of arrow.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um.
So we use black backslash because it looks like lambda,
NOTE CONF
a little bit like lambda.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Why did, uh, why did these logicians and mathematicians use
lambda?
NOTE CONF
Uh, they just picked a Greek letter.
There's no reason they just picked that one.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so, um.
And what they were doing were they they were, uh,
NOTE CONF
defining and and studying a theory of functions.
A pure theory of functions.
NOTE CONF
And this was before computers existed.
And, um, there's actually a lot of a lot of
NOTE CONF
kind of mathematics you can do about functions.
And this is functions independent of, um, of, of, of
NOTE CONF
numbers and strings and all those other things independent of
values, just functions.
NOTE CONF
And one of them was Alonzo Church, and another one
was Haskell Curry.
NOTE CONF
And these are now in functional programming, and they're in
functional programming via a language called Lisp, which was invented
NOTE CONF
in 1960s, the first functional programming language.
And it was invented by a guy named John McCarthy,
NOTE CONF
who was for many years a professor at Stanford University.
Um, and he took a course in lambda calculus from
NOTE CONF
Alonzo Church in the 50s or something 40s or 50s,
I guess, in the 50s.
NOTE CONF
And, um, and he thought it might be useful.
So he put it in lisp.
NOTE CONF
And since then it's been in all functional programming languages.
And nowadays it's even in conventional programming languages.
NOTE CONF
Um, so it's you can do lambda expressions in Java
as of 2004.
NOTE CONF
So 20 years ago.
So, um.
NOTE CONF
Java got lambda expressions only, um, 44 years after Lisp
had them.
NOTE CONF
And you have them now in, I think in Python
as well.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So ideas from functional programming gradually make their way into,
NOTE CONF
into other programming languages.
This is a prime example okay.
NOTE CONF
So the ability to write functions without names basically.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So um this is how you evaluate lambda expressions.
So if you have the, you know, the lambda expression
NOTE CONF
that we've just seen, lambda x arrow, I'm going to
pronounce this lambda even though it's the backslash okay.
NOTE CONF
Lambda x arrow x greater than zero if you apply
this to three okay.
NOTE CONF
So what happens you replace okay.
So so the argument uh x is three in this
NOTE CONF
case.
So you replace you replace x in the body.
NOTE CONF
This is the body by three.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Giving you three greater than zero, which is true.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Or in this other case, you replace x in the
body.
NOTE CONF
By three.
In this case it occurs twice.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So three times three that equals nine.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So we're replacing the formal parameter.
NOTE CONF
Remember this terminology formal parameter uh by the actual parameter.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Formal parameter is the name of the parameter.
And the function definition actual parameter is the the actual
NOTE CONF
value that you use when you do that.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And you can um, you can do this.
You know, this this gets more complicated.
NOTE CONF
So this is a this is a definition.
This is my add function from the beginning.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Without the name Add so lambda x y arrow x
NOTE CONF
plus y.
This notation actually is a is an abbreviation for.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
Let me see.
Uh, won't let me do this, okay.
NOTE CONF
I don't want to include all these parentheses.
Never mind.
NOTE CONF
Um, this notation where you've got lambda and then two
variables.
NOTE CONF
It's an abbreviation for this notation where we've got lambda
x arrow lambda x arrow so and so and so
NOTE CONF
if you're applying this to two arguments three and four
you first apply it to three which results in um
NOTE CONF
x here whoops x here being replaced by three.
And then in the second stage you can apply that
NOTE CONF
lambda expression to four resulting in y here being replaced
by four.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Two steps of a value of of of application.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So you can you can actually use lambda expressions to
NOTE CONF
kind of explain what's going on in this, in this
world of, of of functions and partial applications and so
NOTE CONF
forth.
And in fact, lambda lambda calculus is the basis of
NOTE CONF
all functional programming.
You can you can translate every Haskell program into lambda
NOTE CONF
calculus.
And the meaning of things in Haskell can be explained
NOTE CONF
by translating them to lambda calculus and then looking at
what you get.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So lambda calculus is like the, the fundamental, um, like
NOTE CONF
basis of, of functional programming.
And in fact, there's something there's something more primitive even
NOTE CONF
than lambda calculus.
It's called it's called combinators, which I'm not going to
NOTE CONF
tell you about.
I'll just mention combinators.
NOTE CONF
All All lambda calculus can be translated into combinators.
And there are two combinators.
NOTE CONF
So you can translate all Haskell programs into lambda calculus.
And then all the lambda calculus.
NOTE CONF
You get into big strings of two letters.
It's like DNA.
NOTE CONF
The basis in DNA.
DNA has four letters.
NOTE CONF
Um, and you can, you know, all the genes can
be expressed with these four letters.
NOTE CONF
And then in programming, you can express all your programs
using two letters.
NOTE CONF
And so if you're, if you're um, and then, um,
sorry, this is a diversion.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
In physics, um, you've got atoms and automatic and elementary
NOTE CONF
particles and they, they all boil down into quarks and
there's six kinds of quarks.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So if you're ever at a party with, um, biologists
NOTE CONF
or physicists and they tell you about DNA and, you
know, uh, the miracle of life, and there's four there's
NOTE CONF
four bases in DNA or with physicists who tell you
about the origins of the universe and and the Big
NOTE CONF
Bang and quarks and so forth.
You can tell them about combinators, and you can compete
NOTE CONF
on whose elementary particles are better.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So we've only we only need two, um, for programming.
They require, uh, four for biology and six for physics.
NOTE CONF
Anyway, um, uh, I'll just skip this.
This is this is the kind of, um, mathematical explanation
NOTE CONF
of this function application rule.
It's called beta.
NOTE CONF
Again.
Um, logicians and mathematicians like Greek letters.
NOTE CONF
So beta.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Any questions about that?
NOTE CONF
You're numbed.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
I'm going to now talk about something called sections.
And this is a this is kind of a convenient
NOTE CONF
notation.
Uh, convenient shorthand for partially applied functions.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
In Haskell, it's a way to abbreviate, um, essentially abbreviate
NOTE CONF
lambda expressions.
Um, here are five sections.
NOTE CONF
They're called sections okay.
And they always have parentheses around them.
NOTE CONF
I mean, you remember that we've seen already, uh, parentheses
used for kind of turning, uh, operators like plus into
NOTE CONF
functions.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So.
Here we've got parentheses, parentheses around a little expression which
NOTE CONF
is an operator And an argument.
Okay, here we've got greater than zero.
NOTE CONF
So argument on the right hand side here we've got
two times argument on the left hand side.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So the argument might be in the left or the
NOTE CONF
right okay.
The thing that, that, that, that um the thing is
NOTE CONF
in common here.
We've got a binary function.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Greater than times plus exponentiation okay.
NOTE CONF
And we've got it's a function with two arguments.
And we give it one of the arguments.
NOTE CONF
And sometimes it's the second argument and sometimes it's the
first argument okay.
NOTE CONF
Second argument, first argument, second argument, first argument, second argument.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And that's the idea is it's the partial application of
that function to one of its arguments.
NOTE CONF
And the the argument that is not present is the
one that remains.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So so greater than zero.
NOTE CONF
This stands for the function which takes x and checks
to see if it's greater than zero.
NOTE CONF
Okay so here's greater than zero.
Whoops.
NOTE CONF
Anyway here's the greater than zero thing here over here.
All right.
NOTE CONF
So that's the that's the thing in this section.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Two times stands for the function which takes x and
takes two times x okay.
NOTE CONF
So here's the two times bit of that.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Here's the one plus.
For this okay.
NOTE CONF
Here's two to the power of from the from this
expression.
NOTE CONF
And you know you can use the same you can
use the same operator.
NOTE CONF
Um leaving off the first door the second argument.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So this is two to the power of X because
it's it's two to the power of.
NOTE CONF
And this is um to the power of to the
power of two.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So uh, second argument omitted means we were talking about
NOTE CONF
exponentiation or.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Exponentiation meaning two to the power of something.
And um, leaving off the first argument means we're talking
NOTE CONF
about squaring something.
Okay, so this is a convenient notation which just saves
NOTE CONF
the trouble of writing, um, this full lambda expression.
You just have to write down this, this, this little,
NOTE CONF
um, abbreviation for this thing kind of handy.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So what it allows us to do is, for example,
um, you know, a few minutes ago, I showed you
NOTE CONF
this, uh, this definition.
This is the sum of the squares of the of
NOTE CONF
the positive numbers in a list.
And I can further simplify that to this to this
NOTE CONF
definition here.
Okay so I've replaced.
NOTE CONF
I've replaced this lambda expression with this section.
And I've replaced this lambda expression with this section.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
This is okay.
NOTE CONF
X0X times x.
That's the same as X0X squared.
NOTE CONF
And this section expresses the function that squares things okay.
And uh lambda X0X greater than zero is a function
NOTE CONF
checking to see whether a value is greater than zero
or not.
NOTE CONF
And that's this section here okay.
So that sum that's.
NOTE CONF
That's a kind of nice definition.
You can read that.
NOTE CONF
You know what it means.
Or at least I hope you know what it means.
NOTE CONF
You've got an application of fold to plus, and then
the, um, you know, the squaring function and the checking
NOTE CONF
to see whether something is positive function.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Any questions about that.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Let me give you the read.
You had a question.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
For the sections does it only work for the numbers
NOTE CONF
that is stated there.
Or we can use any number for example larger.
NOTE CONF
Does it only work for numbers you're saying.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
For example the larger than is it only work for
zero or any number.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So it works for any any type of data.
NOTE CONF
So not just integers.
Is that the answer you're asking for?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Okay, so it only works for binary binary operators.
NOTE CONF
Can you use a variable instead of an integer?
Uh, yes.
NOTE CONF
You can use a variable instead of integer.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Something else.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
You can use a variable instead of integer.
By the way, you can also before I answer the
NOTE CONF
next question, you can also um use if you want.
Remember um remember I said you can write um, any,
NOTE CONF
any function as an infix by putting back quotes around
it.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
You can also write, if you wanted to, you could
NOTE CONF
write.
That as a section okay.
NOTE CONF
Because that's now a binary A binary function, and you
can partially apply it to either its first or second
NOTE CONF
argument.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, you know, uh.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Uh, you had a question.
Um, would.
NOTE CONF
You be able to that bottom function definition, would you
be able to carry that to remove the XS, or
NOTE CONF
does the filter bit require, uh, the access to either.
I'm coming to that.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So good question.
NOTE CONF
Um, you're asking about whether you can kind of drop
the X's.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Uh.
NOTE CONF
Zero way to define this for prefix functions.
For prefix.
NOTE CONF
Functions.
Uh, you mean you mean um sections.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Yeah, sections.
NOTE CONF
So that's what I was writing up there.
Okay, so if f is a prefix function.
NOTE CONF
So normally you'd write f.
Normally you'd write f.
NOTE CONF
You know, like that.
That's prefix.
NOTE CONF
And you can turn it into infix by, by putting
back quotes around it.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Anybody else?
NOTE CONF
Chance with the, uh, the red foam thing.
No.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Whoops.
Okay, let me just finish by talking about function composition.
NOTE CONF
So, um, you can you can apply functions to values
to get results, and you can compose, uh, functions to
NOTE CONF
get other functions.
And of course, uh, in Haskell a function composition is
NOTE CONF
a built in function.
And it has it has this type.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
It's written using dot.
NOTE CONF
Um, in mathematics function composition is usually a little circle
okay.
NOTE CONF
So we're using a dot here.
It's kind of like a circle.
NOTE CONF
And um it, it takes two functions and it produces
a function.
NOTE CONF
And here's the definition f composed with g is a
function which when you apply it to x gives you
NOTE CONF
f of g of x.
Now um.
NOTE CONF
The type okay, the idea of function composition is you've
got a function from here to here, okay.
NOTE CONF
It goes from here to there.
And you've got another function from here to there.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And that direction and you compose them to get a
NOTE CONF
function from here to here okay.
First function from here to their second function to here
NOTE CONF
to there.
You get from here to there okay.
NOTE CONF
This is the idea.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
The, um, it might be somewhat surprising the type up
there because you'd kind of expect first function from A
NOTE CONF
to B, second function from B to C, okay.
And this is the other way around.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And that's because.
NOTE CONF
That's because of the way that this definition is, is
I mean if you want to write f dot g
NOTE CONF
apply to x equals f of g of x.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So g is the first thing being applied.
So there's g and there's f okay.
NOTE CONF
But we're applying composition to f and then to g.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So the definition the the the type has to be
be rock arrow um a Arab.
NOTE CONF
And then you get.
A rock is the result.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, this is sometimes, uh, confusing.
NOTE CONF
I like to use the, um, to to to pronounce
dot as, uh, as after f after g.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Because it's, it's g followed by f, so f after
NOTE CONF
g to remind myself of the way around that this
is.
NOTE CONF
Um, you can use this to compose, for example, pause
with square to get, um, uh, you know, the fact
NOTE CONF
that, well, to check whether the square of a number
is positive or not, um, and, uh.
NOTE CONF
I'm running out of time, so I just want to
see what I have to say.
NOTE CONF
So composition is associative.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Is it commutative?
Anybody commutative?
NOTE CONF
No, it's not commutative.
Um, the types don't I mean.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
It isn't commutative.
NOTE CONF
You know, doing one thing and another is not the
same as doing the other one.
NOTE CONF
And then the first okay.
Does it have an identity.
NOTE CONF
What's the identity element?
Anybody.
NOTE CONF
Did you say identity function?
I didn't hear you, but okay.
NOTE CONF
I don't have time.
The identity function.
NOTE CONF
The identity is the identity function is the function taking
x to x.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
If you take that, if you take that identity function,
NOTE CONF
you compose it with anything.
It's the same as the anything.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And then finally, if you want, you can um, you
NOTE CONF
can define this some there's some of the squares of
the positive numbers are using function composition.
NOTE CONF
So it's it's the composition of the fold function applied
to two arguments.
NOTE CONF
The map function applied to one argument and the filter
function apply to one argument.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And this is the answer to your question over there.
NOTE CONF
You're not looking at me, but there was a question
about whether you can leave or it was no, it
NOTE CONF
was here somewhere.
Right.
NOTE CONF
It was whether you could leave out the X's.
So this is how you leave out the X's, okay.
NOTE CONF
You define the thing instead of defining it as a
as you know, fold applied to map apply to filter
NOTE CONF
apply to X's, you define it as the composition of
those three partial functions.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Uh, I'm out of time.
NOTE CONF
Thank you.
By the way, let me just say something about thanks
NOTE CONF
for applause.
It's very, very kind of you.
NOTE CONF
Um, the lecture is here on Monday.
After me, uh, is a guy I know from engineering.
NOTE CONF
He teaches fluid mechanics and he always says, you know,
Don, your students applaud.
NOTE CONF
My students never applaud.
Um, so he's jealous.
NOTE CONF
So keep it up.
Uh, do you mind if I ask you a question?
NOTE CONF
Of course.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Go ahead.
So my previous question about pretext functions in sections.
NOTE CONF
So.